Abstract

Population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling traditionally employs
classical ordinary differential equations for drug dynamics simulation. This work
reformulates compartmental models as open quantum systems governed by Hamil-
tonian dynamics, achieving superior statistical performance. Four pharmacolog-
ical compartments (central, peripheral, effect-site, response) are encoded using
twelve qubits, evolved through PennyLane-implemented quantum circuits where
inter-compartmental transfers manifest as quantum jump operators via controlled
rotation gates. Applied to Phase 1 clinical data, quantum-enhanced stochastic ap-
proximation expectation-maximization achieves log-likelihood of −1366.81 versus
classical −8403.60, representing sixfold improvement in model fit. Parameter esti-
mates converge identically (CL = 2.0 L/h, V1 = 10.0 L, V2 = 20.0 L, Imax = 0.8,
IC50 = 2.0 ng/mL), validating quantum accuracy while demonstrating enhanced
residual error modeling. SAEM optimization converges 42% faster (26 versus 44.74
minutes), though PennyLane API overhead increases total runtime 53% across 242
million circuit evaluations. Dose optimization recommends 20.0 mg daily or 15
mg weekly for standard populations targeting 90% biomarker suppression, with
quantum methods showing greater sensitivity to population heterogeneity (25-33%
dose reductions in specific scenarios). The framework successfully simulates 28,488
subjects with 100% stability, establishing quantum computing as viable for pop-
ulation pharmacometrics despite current computational overhead requiring future
optimization.
